---
layout: post
title: Roadmap for v5.0
author: Peter Hill
description: An overview of planned changes for the 5.0 release
---

BOUT++ has grown organically over the years, and now we want to tidy
things up, smooth off rough edges and redesign some important
components. Some of these changes will necessarily be
backwards-incompatible, and unfortunately may require changes to
physics models. Where that is the case, we hope to be able to provide
tools to make the changes as easy as possible.

This is a non-exhaustive list of features and changes we would like to
implement in the next major release (v5) of BOUT++. We've separated
the out into "smaller" and "larger". Smaller changes are those we think
should be orthogonal to other items, or won't require much in the way
of designing. Larger changes likely affect many separate parts of the
framework, and will require some effort to design them correctly.

### Smaller
- Integrate [{fmt}](https://fmt.dev) and
  [spdlog](https://github.com/gabime/spdlog)
- Namespacing and header moving
    - Renaming/project layout
- Replace `FieldData`, `FieldGroup` functionality
- Investigate how much `Vector2D/3D` require base-class
- `Timer` features and options for default `Monitor`
- Remove non-PhysicsModel based solving
- Remove (deprecated) `invert_laplace`
- Standardise all factory methods
- Improving the Python wrapper
    - Using Pybind11?
- `Mesh` initialisation
- `Coordinates` lazy computation of Christoffel symbols


### Larger:
- `Solver`, `PhysicsModel`, `Problem` -- ownership and interrelatedness
    - Separate `PhysicsModel` virtual for dumping?
    - Fields take the `DataFile` and handle writing itself?
    - How to handle dumping both local variables and evolving variables
- `Mesh` rewrite
    - Simpler API
    - Fewer assumptions
    - More flexible domains
    - New way of specifying branch cuts alongside existing system
    - Non-logically-rectangular meshes
    - Higher-level topology API
    - What is the sufficient abstraction?
- `Coordinates` rewrite
    - Output/convert to real space for visualisation/field line mapping etc.
    - Real space mapping inside BOUT++
    - New input format for geometry specification
- Boundaries rewrite
    - Regions and operators
- File I/O rewrite
